Lesson Plans (2hr lesson)
Suggested times are given, this does not mean concept should always take 15min, it just means if
you follow along the text, concepts will usually add up to 15min i.e. there can be 3 short concepts
introduced on one day each with lab portions between them.
Each lesson plan has the following elements:
Review (5min) – The teacher reviews the last lesson’s concept or concepts that are going to be
carried forward into the new lecture.

Concept (15min) – This is the general concept for the day. Multiple concepts may be introduced in
one day. The concept is explained firstly at a very high level as in the text. An analogy is then used to
show how the concept is applied or why it is important. A lot of this information is provided in the
text. The teacher is encouraged to spend about 15-25min of the lesson on this portion of the class.
An important part of this section of the class is the language used. A lot of concepts in this class will
have names that are not familiar to the students e.g. abstraction, but the aim is not that the student
should be able to cough up a word for word definition. It is preferred that the student understands
and can try and explain the concept in some way that shows they understand, most importantly, in
their code! Formal definitions will be given anyway to satisfy students who would prefer them but
unlike in their standard school curriculum, are not enforced.

Code demonstrations (35min) – This is where the teacher puts a concept into practice using a coded
example. In most cases, the class should follow along as well so that they practice, typing and
debugging. We discourage just showing the students prewritten examples as this does not allow
them to analyse every step of the process. As stated before, no assumptions should be made about
the students, not even their ability to type! Multiple examples expressing the same concept will be
used to allow the students to notice similarities in blocks of code. Due to the cumulative nature of
the course, examples will often include as many of the concepts from past classes as possible for
revision purposes.

Exercise (35min) – Every lesson will come with at least 1 exercise which either builds on the
demonstration or revisits the concept in some way. For this portion the students will work amongst
themselves, with minimal help from the tutors unless the problem appears too difficult. Help is
suggested in the form of hints or alternative examples rather than the actual solution. Each exercise
will come with a standard goal that must be reached by at least 90% the students in the class. If this
goal is not met this should be taken as a sign that the class may not yet understand or the problem is
too difficult. For the quicker students, the exercises have other parts that explore how varying
different things in the code alter how it behaves as well as supplementary exercises.
Applications (5min)– This is a very important section of the class that explains how the day’s
concept is used in a real example, or introduces a cool technology like Virtual Reality, Gaming, how
social media sites work or news in the tech industry. This is generally supposed to get students get
excited about programming and help them realize the potential uses of the concept they learned. 

Recap (5min) - This is the last portion of the class which reviews the general concept learned during
the day. The teacher can also talk about common mistakes and try to make sure there is as little
confusion as possible.

Debugging

This is probably one of the more frustrating aspects of the course. Different computers can have
different unexpected problems that may or may not be easy to fix. For this we can only depend on
the experience of the teacher. For helping students debug code, it’s important to help them learn
from their mistakes and learn which types of error messages come from what kind of error.

Homework

Often times it may be difficult to give coding homework as the students may not have access to
computers or be willing to install the software themselves. The homework given in this textbook is
doable without a computer and instead is used to let students get used to things like finding
solutions to logic operations, identifying data types and debugging code snippets.

Demonstrations

The text includes live demoes, some even using students to explain concepts. This is intended to
make the classes fun and help with visualization. There exist a lot of resources online that the
teacher can look up online to add to the ones included.

Conventions

At the beginning of every lesson plan, there is a box with things to revise which will be useful for the
lesson. Questions written in red are questions that the teacher should ask the class rather than
giving the answer. Functions, variables and keywords are written in bold.

Terminology

Teachers are encouraged to use any language or words that they think will help explain concepts to
students. However, it is best only to do this when explaining something for the first time and then
using the proper terms as much as possible so that the students get used to them and understand
what they mean. This is because every programmer in the world, even the best, look up how to do
things online or in documentation which is written in standard language. It will thus be easier for
students to learn by themselves and debug if they know the right words.